INTRODUCTION

    This is Gimp-Print version 4.2.5, a stable release in the 4.2
    series.  Gimp-Print is a suite of printer drivers that may be used
    with most common UNIX print spooling systems, including CUPS, lpr,
    LPRng, or others.  These drivers provide high quality printing for
    UNIX (including Macintosh OS X 10.2 and newer) and Linux systems
    in many cases equal to or better than proprietary vendor-supplied
    drivers, and can be used for many of the most demanding printing
    tasks.  A complete list of supported printers may be found in the
    NEWS file.

    This release is backward compatible with other releases of
    Gimp-Print 4.2 (4.2.0, 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3, and 4.2.4).

    Gimp-Print also includes a plug-in for the GIMP image editor.
    This plug-in is also distributed with the GIMP.

    Please read this README, and the NEWS file carefully!  Many things
    have changed from previous releases.  The package is quite
    different in many ways from Gimp-Print 4.0, and you should read
    these instructions carefully.

    A user's manual exists in doc/users_guide; it is normally
    installed in PDF and HTML form in /usr/local/share/gimp-print/doc.
    This manual covers setup and use of the GIMP Print plug-in and the
    CUPS driver.

    We urge all distributors of this package to read the PACKAGING and
    KNOWN BUILD ISSUES section below.


MACINTOSH OS X NOTE

    As of Gimp-Print 4.2.2, this package fully supports Macintosh OS X
    10.2.  OS X uses CUPS (Common UNIX Printing System) to provide
    printing services; Gimp-Print works with CUPS to permit high
    quality, full-featured printing to a wide variety of printers.

    This package requires Macintosh OS X 10.2 or later; it will not
    work with any 10.0 or 10.1 release (including 10.1.5), or any
    Macintosh OS prior to OS X.

    We strongly recommend that Macintosh users download the
    precompiled installer package from
    http://gimp-print.sourceforge.net/MacOSX.php3 rather than attempt
    to build this package from source, as using the installer is much
    simpler.

    We further recommend that Macintosh OS X users install ESP
    GhostScript, to permit printing from applications (such as most
    Adobe applications) that generate PostScript rather than PDF
    output.  NOTE THAT WITHOUT THIS PACKAGE, YOU WILL NOT BE ABLE TO
    PRINT FROM ANY CARBON APPLICATIONS (in particular, many Adobe
    applications)!  Directions for that are also available at
    http://gimp-print.sourceforge.net/MacOSX.php3.

    Users installing these packages do not need any additional
    software packages.

    Please read the release notes (the NEWS file) for information on
    bugs fixed, new features, supported printers, and any specific
    information related to your printer.


BASIC INSTALLATION

    Gimp-Print includes the following primary components:

      - The core driver, libgimpprint.so
      - A user's manual
      - A Print plug-in for the GIMP
      - A CUPS (Common UNIX Printing System) driver
      - A standard Ghostscript driver, `stp'
      - An IJS-based Ghostscript driver
      - Support for the Foomatic spooler configuration system
      - A utility to administer Epson printers, escputil

    By default, Gimp-Print builds the Print plugin for the GIMP, the
    user's manual, and a utility to perform head cleaning, nozzle
    alignment, and other tasks on EPSON Stylus inkjet printers, named
    "escputil".  Directions for building other components are listed
    below.

    Please check our web site at http://gimp-print.sourceforge.net for
    details about what is and is not supported.

    Please report any problems to gimp-print-devel@sourceforge.net.

    In general, to build Gimp-Print, you run the following commands:

    ./configure [options]
    make
    make install

    If you do not have the GIMP installed (or if you have only the
    user package installed, and not the development package that most
    distributions include separately), the attempt to run configure
    will fail.  To build other components (such as the IJS or CUPS
    drivers) without the GIMP being present, you must use the
    --without-gimp option to configure.

    Note: This package requires the use of GNU Make to compile.  On
    systems with both GNU make and another make installed, GNU make
    may be named `gmake' or `gnumake'.  BSD users in particular will
    need to use 'gmake'.


THE GIMP

    Gimp-Print may be used as a plug-in for the GIMP, providing the
    ability to print images.  If you wish to do so, you must use the
    GIMP 1.2; it is not currently compatible with the GIMP 1.3.

    To build and install the Gimp Print plug-in:

    ./configure [--with-gimp]
    make
    make install

    You may optionally specify --with-gimp if you wish to be explicit
    about building the Gimp Print plugin; --with-gimp is implied if
    `configure' detects that the GIMP is installed, so you do not
    actually need to specify it.

    This installs the GIMP Print plugin in your system plug-in
    directory.  If you wish to install it in your personal plugin
    directory, you may use

    ./configure --enable-user-install

    If you have installed the Gimp as a precompiled package
    (e. g. from an RPM), you will need to install the gimp-devel
    (sometimes called gimp-developer, or something similar) package as
    well as the gimp package.  The gimp package as supplied in most
    distributions only contains what's needed to run the Gimp, not the
    additional files needed to build GIMP-based applications and
    plugins such as the Print plugin.  On some systems, you will also
    need to install gtk-devel and glib-devel packages as well.

    If you have installed the Gimp from source on Linux: after running
    make install, you must run ldconfig as root before attempting to
    build this plugin.


CUPS

    Gimp-print may be used as a driver under CUPS (Common UNIX
    Printing System), if your system uses that spooler.  Full
    description of CUPS is beyond the scope of this README file; full
    information may be found at http://www.cups.org.  Gimp-print 4.2
    requires CUPS 1.1.9 or higher.  We recommend use of 1.1.14 or
    above; that release of CUPS features better internationalization
    and fixes some important bugs.

    This package includes a CUPS driver that may be built, allowing
    use of this software for general printing purposes.  To build and
    install the CUPS driver, you must run:

    ./configure --with-cups
    make
    make install
    /etc/software/init.d/cups restart

    The last command varies with your operating system; the purpose is
    to restart the CUPS server (daemon) so that it sees the newly
    installed driver.  It is typically /etc/init.d/cups,
    /etc/rc.d/cups, or even /etc/rc.d/init.d/cups.  Your system may
    have a different way to restart the CUPS server.  OS X uses the
    following command:

    sudo /System/Library/StartupItems/PrintingServices/PrintingServices.sh restart
  
    NOTE for Linux (at least) users: If you are using CUPS 1.1.11 or
    higher, and you have a USB-connected printer, you must have a
    printer connected to each USB port that you plan to use and
    powered on when you restart CUPS.  If you do not do so, you will
    not be able to perform the following step (reinstalling the
    printer), as described below.

    Following this, you must reinstall any printers that you are using
    Gimp-Print PPD's with.  Such printers may be identified in any
    CUPS front end (e. g. KUPS, or via the web interface) because they
    look something like this:

		    EPSON Stylus Photo EX, CUPS+GIMP-print v4.2.5(en)

    If the version number (in this case, 4.2.5) does not match
    the version of Gimp-Print that you are installing, you must use
    Modify Printer to force the new PPD file to get installed.
    Failure to do so may lead to incorrect output and/or other errors!

    Starting with CUPS 1.1.11, you cannot choose an AppSocket
    connection and enter "usb:/dev/usblp0" or the like as the URI; you
    will get a "client-error-not-possible" error at the end of the
    installation process, and you will have a message like the
    following in your CUPS error log (typically
    /var/log/cups/error_log):

E [21/Nov/2001:17:59:07 +0500] add_printer: bad device-uri attribute 'usb:/dev/usblp0'!

    If the printer was turned on correctly, you will be given a choice
    of a USB connection in the Device dialog.

    You may also have problems if you have a .lpoptions file that has
    old options set.  If you have problems printing, please remove any
    existing .lpoptions file in your home directory and try printing
    again.

    This package normally builds translated versions of the PPD
    files.  This provides PPD files translated into the languages that
    this package supports.  However, the translation process does not
    work correctly on all systems; in particular, many BSD systems are
    known to simply build multiple copies of the English PPD files.
    If your system does not build these files correctly, which will be
    apparent when you use a CUPS front end to select a PPD file and
    you see something like this:

		    EPSON Stylus Photo EX, CUPS+GIMP-print v4.2.5(en)
		    EPSON Stylus Photo EX, CUPS+GIMP-print v4.2.5(en)
		    EPSON Stylus Photo EX, CUPS+GIMP-print v4.2.5(en)

    rather than this:

		    EPSON Stylus Photo EX, CUPS+GIMP-print v4.2.5(en)
		    EPSON Stylus Photo EX, CUPS+GIMP-print v4.2.5(sv)
		    EPSON Stylus Photo EX, CUPS+GIMP-print v4.2.5(fr)

    you may wish to turn off the translation of PPD files:

    ./configure --with-cups --without-translated-ppds

    You may also wish to do this to greatly reduce the number of PPD
    files installed on your system, as the number of translations is
    large and growing.

    The PPD files associated with this driver are for Level 2
    PostScript.  CUPS implements most level 3 PostScript, but there
    are a few constructs that are not implemented.  For this reason,
    we have chosen to define a LanguageLevel of 2 rather than 3.
    PostScript level 3 files are smaller in some cases, and can
    produce smoother gradients, but few applications generate Level 3
    PostScript.  If you would like to use level 3 PostScript, you may
    do

    ./configure --with-cups --enable-cups-level3-ppds

    Unless you fully understand what you are doing, we recommend not
    doing this.

    If you do not wish to build the Gimp Print plugin, you must run

    ./configure --with-cups --without-gimp

    If you have installed CUPS as a precompiled package (e. g. it's
    the standard printing system that your distribution uses), you may
    need to install a separate development package (typically called
    "cups-devel" or "cups-developer").  The CUPS package typically
    installed by most distributions only contains the components
    needed to run CUPS, not those required to build additional CUPS
    drivers.

    We recommend that all users who wish to use this package for
    general purpose printing install either CUPS or use Foomatic with
    the IJS driver (both described below) and use that as their
    printing system, rather than the traditional lpd or lp systems.
    It is much simpler to manage than lpd, and provides an excellent
    web-based interface for both administration and use.  Please visit
    http://www.cups.org for information on downloading and installing
    CUPS.


FOOMATIC

    Gimp-Print includes support for the Foomatic meta-driver package.
    This requires the foomatic-xml distribution.  Foomatic is
    available from http://www.linuxprinting.org/foomatic.html.  It is
    also available in Debian unstable.  For best results, use the
    version in cvs.  The first version of Foomatic (the one used with
    Gimp-Print 4.0) is not compatible with Gimp-Print 4.2.  Note that
    the Foomatic driver is named `stp' in Gimp-Print 4.0; in
    Gimp-Print 4.2 it is named `gimp-print' for the Ghostscript
    ("stp") driver and "gimp-print-ijs" for the IJS driver. The data
    for the Gimp-Print 4.0 driver is not compatible with the 4.2
    driver.

    To verify that you have an appropriate version of Foomatic, please
    run

    foomatic-kitload

    or

    /usr/local/sbin/foomatic-kitload (if /usr/local/sbin is not on your PATH).

    Both Foomatic 2.0.x (stable branch) and 2.9.x (development branch,
    approaching Foomatic 3.0.x) are supported. With Foomatic 2.9.x there
    are the extra features of heaving an additional "PrintoutMode" option
    with pre-configurations for common printing tasks and the options
    being put into different groups ("General", "PrintoutMode",
    "Adjustment").

    If you don't have Foomatic installed, or the version that is
    installed is too old, please download the current Foomatic 2.0.x 
    package from

    http://www.linuxprinting.org/download/foomatic/foomatic-current.tar.gz

    and follow the instructions in that package. See

    http://www.linuxprinting.org/foomatic2.9/foomatic.html

    on how to download and install Foomatic 2.9.x.

    After Foomatic is installed, build the Foomatic data as follows:

    ./configure --with-foomatic
    make
    make install

    for obtaining the Foomatic data only for the Ghostscript ("stp")
    driver or

    ./configure --with-ijs --with-foomatic
    make
    make install

    for obtaining the Foomatic data for both the Ghostscript ("stp")
    driver and the IJS driver (note that this also build the IJS
    interface itself, so you have to follow the instructions in
    src/ghost/README, too).

    The "make install" step will add the necessary data to your
    Foomatic installation.  It must be run as root.  It will fail if
    Foomatic is not installed or your Foomatic is too old.  Now you
    can either set up a queue for your printer with
    "foomatic-configure" (see USAGE file in the Foomatic package) or
    generate the printer description file for your spooler (with 
    "foomatic-datafile") and configure your printer as described on
    the spooler-specific web pages of linuxprinting.org.

    Note that it almost never makes sense to build the Foomatic driver
    without also building the Ghostscript driver or the IJS driver, 
    even if Foomatic is to be used with CUPS (CUPS-O-Matic).  Please 
    read the instructions below in the GHOSTSCRIPT section.

    If you do not wish to build the Gimp Print plugin, you must run

    ./configure --with-foomatic --without-gimp

    or

    ./configure --with-ijs --with-foomatic --without-gimp

    Please visit http://www.linuxprinting.org/foomatic.html for more
    information on Foomatic.

    Foomatic provides an alternate interface to CUPS, in addition to
    an interface to LPD, LPRng, GNUlpr, PDQ, PPR, CPS, and spooler-less
    printing.


GHOSTSCRIPT

    Gimp-Print 4.2 includes a Ghostscript driver that may be built,
    allowing use of this software for general printing purposes.  This
    package requires GNU Ghostscript 5.10, 5.50, 6.51, or 6.52.  There
    is a simpler build procedure for GNU Ghostscript 6.53 and 7.05,
    and for ESP Ghostscript 7.05.  In particular, versions of
    Ghostscript that are not licensed under the GNU General Public
    License (GPL) are not supported, and this driver may not be
    distributed with such a version.  If you wish to use Gimp-Print
    with AFPL Ghostscript, you may do so via the IJS-based driver,
    described below.

    Please read src/ghost/README for more information, including how
    to build and install it, and available options; the build
    procedure here merely creates the necessary source files that you
    must add to your Ghostscript source.  The directions vary for
    different versions of Ghostscript.

    We *strongly* recommend that end users not attempt to use this
    driver directly.  The available options are very complex, and the
    standard printer configuration tools (such as apsfilter and
    magicfilter) are not designed for drivers such as Gimp-print, and
    do not provide a convenient interface to the driver's
    capabilities.  We recommend that end users either install CUPS, as
    described above, or use Foomatic to configure printer queues.
    CUPS is very easy to install, configure, and use, and is the
    recommended solution.

    Note that many of the options to the Ghostscript driver are
    incompatible with the options used prior to release 4.2.0.
    Please read src/ghost/README for information on the current
    options.

    This driver will not be developed beyond the 4.2 release series.
    It will be replaced by the IJS driver, described below.


IJS

    Gimp-Print includes an IJS-based Ghostscript driver.  As
    paraphrased from the Ghostscript documentation, IJS is a
    relatively new initiative to improve the quality and ease of use
    of inkjet printing with Ghostscript.  Using IJS, one can add new
    drivers, or upgrade existing ones, without recompiling
    Ghostscript.  IJS drivers run as separate processes that
    communicate with Ghostscript via an IPC channel.  As the basic IJS
    implementation is licensed compatibly with the GPL, and as the
    driver runs in a separate process from Ghostscript itself, the IJS
    driver may be used with AFPL Ghostscript (7.04 and above).

    The basic way to build the IJS driver is

    ./configure --with-ijs [--without-gimp]
    make
    make install

    You must have the IJS libraries installed for this to work.
    Instructions for that are included with GNU Ghostscript 6.53 and
    beyond, and AFPL Ghostscript 7.04 and beyond.

    Detailed instructions for building and using the IJS driver is
    described in src/ghost/README.


RECOMMENDED SETTINGS

    We recommend starting with all default settings for the color
    settings.  The settings can be adjusted as necessary for
    particular combinations of ink, paper, and subject material.

    We recommend use of the Adaptive Hybrid dithering algorithm in
    most cases.  Ordered dithering also works very well in many cases,
    and is somewhat faster, but it does not work very well with text
    and very fine details (certain kinds of line art), particularly at
    high resolutions.  Fast dithering is also quite usable in many
    cases.

    On most inkjet printers, 600 or 720 dpi will produce very high
    quality; 1200x1200 or 1440x720 dpi will produce extremely high
    quality.


SUPPORT

    1) Read the FAQ, in doc/FAQ.html.  Your question may be answered
       there.

    2) Read the user's manual, in doc/users_guide.

    3) There are public forums on Sourceforge dedicated to this
       package.  Please see
       http://sourceforge.net/forum/?group_id=1537 for more
       information.  The Help forum is a good source of information.

    4) If you have a technical support issue that does not appear to
       be a bug in the software, you can use the Tech Support Manager.
       Please see http://sourceforge.net/support/?group_id=1537.

    5) If you have found a clear bug in the package, you may file a
       bug report at http://sourceforge.net/bugs/?group_id=1537.

    6) You may send mail to the gimp-print-devel@sourceforge.net
       mailing list.  This is recommended as a last resort only.


KNOWN BUILD ISSUES

    * There is a known complication building "escputil" that causes
      problems on some systems.  "escputil" uses the "readline"
      package, to support command editing and history within the
      program.  Unfortunately, linking programs with "readline" often
      requires linking against additional libraries, and the exact
      library depends upon the system (e. g. not all Linux systems
      have the same requirements).

      The configure script attempts to determine which additional
      library must be linked against.  It tries using the following
      libraries in this order to build a test executable:

      -lncurses
      -lcurses
      -ltermcap
      no additional libraries

      The reason it tries other libraries first is that some systems
      will link successfully, but only fail when an attempt is made to
      actually call readline.  Therefore, we assume that additional
      libraries are required.  Since we try the extra libraries in
      order from most recent to oldest, we expect that the first one
      we find will be appropriate.  For example, if the "ncurses"
      library is the standard on a given system, the "termcap" library
      may be provided for back compatibility, but it is unlikely that
      "termcap" will be the standard with "curses" or "ncurses" being
      provided for compatibility only (so that the link will succeed
      but the command will use the incorrect library).

      As this procedure is not failsafe, we provide the following
      configure options to control this behavior:

      ./configure --with-readline=yes  (the default; attempts to
				       determine the correct library
				       to link against)

      ./configure --with-readline=no   (turns off use of readline
				       altogether)

      ./configure --with-readline=only (specifically instructs
				       configure to not attempt to
				       link against any other
				       libraries)

      ./configure --with-readline=libs (specifies the libraries to be
				       linked against)

      An hypothetical (this won't work anywhere!) example of the
      latter would be

      ./configure --with-readline='-lncurses -ltermcap'

      Note that configure will not allow readline to be used if it
      cannot successfully build the test program, regardless of the
      option selected.  If you are having difficulty getting escputil
      to build, we suggest using --with-readline=no.  The commands
      used within escputil are very short and seldom require
      significant editing.

    * There is a known translation problem building the PPD files used
      by the CUPS driver such that on many systems all of the PPD
      files are in the English language.  This causes CUPS tools, such
      as KUPS or http://localhost:631 to display many copies of each
      PPD file, all in the English (en) language.  In fact, the PPD
      files should be translated into Swedish, Polish, Norwegian,
      French, Danish, Spanish, Slovakian, Greek, British English,
      Dutch, German, and Portuguese.  With CUPS 1.1.10 and lower,
      there should be two copies of the (en) PPD file, and one copy
      each of (sv), (no), (fr), (pl), (da), (sk), (el), (es), (nl),
      (de), and (pt).  With CUPS 1.1.11 and above, there should be
      (en), (en_GB), (sv), (no), (fr), (pl), (da), (sk), (el), (es),
      (nl), (de), and (pt) PPD files.

      The PPD files are created by a program named "genppd" in the
      src/cups directory.  This program is called once for each
      language, and creates all of the PPD files for the language in
      one shot.

      The command 'zgrep' can be used to determine if genppd is
      creating the PPD files correctly, as follows:

	  src/cups$ zgrep LanguageVersion ppd/*/pcl-4.ppd.gz
	  ppd/C/pcl-4.ppd.gz:*LanguageVersion: English
	  ppd/da/pcl-4.ppd.gz:*LanguageVersion: Danish
	  ppd/en_GB/pcl-4.ppd.gz:*LanguageVersion: English-GB
	  ...

      If the PPD file for each language has a different language
      version, the genppd program operated correctly.  If instead the
      output looks like this:

	  src/cups$ zgrep LanguageVersion ppd/*/pcl-4.ppd.gz
	  ppd/C/pcl-4.ppd.gz:*LanguageVersion: English
	  ppd/da/pcl-4.ppd.gz:*LanguageVersion: English
	  ppd/en_GB/pcl-4.ppd.gz:*LanguageVersion: English
	  ...

      the program did not operate correctly.

      If you do not have 'zgrep' on your system, you can gunzip the
      PPD files, and use

	  grep LanguageVersion ppd/*/pcl-4.ppd

      to accomplish the same test.

      The normal mechanism for performing translations is to set the
      LANG environment variable to the appropriate language prior to
      running the program.  This normally causes the program to search
      the translations (normally in /usr/share/locale or
      /usr/lib/locale) for the chosen language.  When a specially
      marked string is used, a special macro calls `gettext()' on the
      string to retrieve the translation, and substitutes the
      translation for the string in question.

      There are two problems with this approach in the context of
      genppd.  The translation engine is intended to be used after
      installation, not during build, and this causes problems.

      1) At the time genppd is run, the translations have not been
         installed in the normal system directories.  Fortunately,
         it's possible to tell the translation machinery (via
         bindtextdomain) to look elsewhere for the translation
         catalogs.  What we do is install the catalogs in a temporary
         directory under src/cups, and tell genppd to instruct the
         translation machinery to look there.  This workaround is
         straightforward, and doesn't normally cause problems.

      2) LANG only lets us pick a valid locale (normally determined by
         listing the directories in /usr/share/locale or
         /usr/lib/locale).  Unfortunately, while language codes (which
         form the base of locales) are standard, the actual locale
         names aren't always.  On some systems, the locale names are
         just the language base names; on others, they are the
         language names concatenated with country codes (e. g. en_US),
         while on others they are language codes concatenated with
         character sets.  We are not aware of any workaround for this,
         possibly short of actually running make install and then
         rebuilding the PPD's.  'make install' will install the
         message catalogs, and that may create the necessary locale
         directories.  This is not exactly a very elegant approach.

      The GNU gettext library (libintl.a) provides another environment
      variable, LANGUAGE, which unconditionally looks up translations
      according to the language, ignoring LANG and the LC_*
      environment variables that are normally used for translation.
      This library is included with the Gimp-Print tarball, but it is
      not used unless --with-included-gettext is specified on the
      configure command line.  This is because many systems provide
      translation machinery in their standard libraries, and it may
      not always be best to use foreign libraries to replace standard
      system functionality.

      We have chosen to use LANGUAGE for this purpose, as the GNU
      gettext library appears to offer the most reliable translation,
      and LANGUAGE appears to offer the most reliable mechanism.  We
      have actually found that LANG and LC_* can interfere with
      LANGUAGE, thus we do not use both.

      To determine if the translations are working, you must actually
      inspect the PPD files.  You will need to

      cd src/cups/ppd/sv
      gunzip *
      more *

      or the like to determine if this is successful.  In particular,
      look for LanguageVersion, and make sure that it is correct (it
      should be "Swedish" in the sv directory, for example), and also
      make sure that the paper sizes are also translated.  We
      currently suggest using the Swedish translation for this purpose
      as it is the most complete.

      If packagers find that the PPD files are all in English, rather
      than translated into the appropriate languages, we suggest the
      following:

      1) Use --with-included-gettext to use the GNU gettext.  If your
         system is not based on GNU libc (Linux usually is based on
         GNU libc; BSD, Solaris, IRIX, etc. are not), you will need
         this option to have any possibility of creating the
         translated PPD files.

      2) Run 'make install' to install the package (including the
         message catalogs) onto the system first, and then do the
         following:

	 cd src/cups
	 rm ppd-stamp
	 make

	 to rebuild the PPD files.  Having the message catalogs on the
	 system may permit this to succeed.

      3) Ensure that your system actually has locales named 'sv',
         'pl', and all of the other supported languages, and change
         LANGUAGE to something more appropriate (most likely LANG,
         LC_MESSAGES, or LC_ALL).

      4) Build the PPD files on a Linux-based system; they are
         portable.

      5) Use --without-translated-ppds on the configure command line
         to suppress the translated PPD files altogether.

      Please feel free to contact us about this issue.


PACKAGING

    We recommend that packagers and distributors of Gimp-print use the
    following settings to build the package:

    --with-foomatic
    --with-ijs  (distros with GhostScript 6.53 or newer)
    --with-user-guide
    --with-samples
    --with-escputil

    We suggest the following packaging:

    * A gimp-print core package should contain the following.  You may
      wish to install the user's guide only in certain formats.

      /usr/lib/libgimpprint.so.1.0 (the core shared library)
      /usr/bin/escputil (Epson Stylus utility)
      /usr/bin/ijsgimpprint (GIMP-Print IJS plug-in driver)
      /usr/share/gimp-print/doc/html (HTML documentation)
      /usr/share/gimp-print/doc/users-guide.pdf
      /usr/share/gimp-print/doc/users-guide.ps
      /usr/share/locale/*/LC_MESSAGES/gimp-print.mo

    * A gimp-print-devel package (for developers) should contain the
      following.  Again, you may wish to install the programmer's
      manual only in certain formats.

      /usr/include/gimp-print
      /usr/bin/gimpprint-config
      /usr/share/gimp-print/doc/manual-html
      /usr/share/gimp-print/doc/gimpprint.ps
      /usr/share/aclocal/gimpprint.m4
      /usr/lib/libgimpprint.a
      /usr/lib/libgimpprint.so

      You may wish to include the test pattern generator source and
      the sample test pattern in this package, and you may wish to
      include test patterns of your own.  You may also wish to include
      the various unprint programs and the parse-* scripts from the
      test directory, although these are typically of more use to
      developers of the Gimp-Print package per se than developers of
      applications layered on Gimp-Print.  However, the test programs
      have received less testing than the others, and are known to
      have some limitations that are not documented.

    * A gimp-print-extras package should contain

      /usr/share/gimp-print/samples

      You may wish to include the test pattern generator and the
      sample test pattern from src/testpattern if you don't include it
      in the developer package; test/unprint; test/pcl-unprint;
      test/bjc-unprint; test/parse-escp2; and test/parse-bjc in this
      package.

    * Ghostscript should be built with the stp driver using either the
      "new" instructions (requiring only gdevstp.c, and linking
      dynamically against libgimpprint) for Ghostscript 6.52 or
      earlier, or the IJS driver for Ghostscript 6.53 or newer.  This
      will allow Ghostscript to operate with future 4.2 upgrade
      releases without requiring recompilation.

    * CUPS packages should include the Gimp-print PPD's in
      /usr/share/cups/model, and the following utilities:

      + "epson" and "canon" belong in /usr/lib/cups/backend.

      + "rastertoprinter", "commandtoepson", and "commandtocanon" belong
	in /usr/lib/cups/filter.

      + "cups-calibrate" belongs in /usr/bin.

      + "command.types" belongs in /etc/cups.

      + "calibrate.ppm" belongs in /usr/share/cups.

      The PPD's packaged with Gimp-print are rather bulky, about 1 MB
      for each language installed.  At present, twelve language
      translations are installed, in addition to the US English
      defaults: GB English, Swedish, Danish, Norwegian, French,
      Polish, Slovakian, Greek, Spanish, Dutch, German, and
      Portuguese.  You may wish to install these selectively.

      Please see KNOWN BUILD ISSUES above for more discussion about
      build issues related to the PPD files.

    * A gimp-print-foomatic package, containing the
      src/foomatic/foomatic-db/gimp-print*/ directories, should be 
      provided to allow people who wish to use foomatic to install the
      corresponding data files. The packaging should arrange to call
      "foomatic-kitload" (or the equivalent) on this tree when it is
      installed.

    * We recommend that you replace the Print plugin bundled with the
      Gimp (any 1.2 version) with the Gimp Print plugin in this
      distribution.  There are various ways to do this; you can run
      'make gimp-dist' from top level and untar the resulting tarball
      into the Gimp source directory prior to building the Gimp, or
      you can install the plugin (src/gimp/print) over an existing
      Gimp Print plugin.  The plugin in the Gimp 1.2 tree is based on
      the older Gimp-Print 4.0 source base; 4.2 supports more printers
      with better quality, and has more features than 4.0.

      We are working with the GIMP development team to replace the
      current Print plugin (which contains the entire source required
      to build the driver) with a smaller base containing just the
      plugin itself.  This will allow compatibility with at least all
      4.2-based releases of Gimp-Print, allowing upgrading the plugin
      by simply upgrading the libgimpprint library.

    * Please read the release notes carefully!

    * Distributors (UNIX vendors and Linux distributors) should
      subscribe to the gimp-print-devel@sourceforge.net mailing list
      to monitor development activities.  When reporting a problem
      related to building the package for distribution, please
      identify yourself as such.  The Gimp-Print package is primarily
      an infrastructure package, rather than an end-user application,
      and as such we particularly want to fix any problems that
      interfere with building and distribution of this package on any
      POSIX-compliant operating system.


DEBIAN

    The Debian packaging has been rewritten from scratch in 4.2.  It
    is compliant with Standards-Version 3.5.6.0, and is lintian-clean.
    It should build from source on woody and sid, but will not build
    on potato.  There are seven separate packages:

    gimp1.2-print	    The GIMP Print plugin. Also contains HTML
			    and SGML documentation that is registered
			    with doc-base.
    cupsys-driver-gimpprint The CUPS driver and PPD files.
    foomatic-db-gimpprint   Foomatic data files for gimp-print drivers.
    ijsgimpprint	    Ghostscript IJS server.
    libgimpprint1	    The libgimpprint library (GIMP-Print core).
    libgimpprint-dev	    Headers, symlinks, m4 macro
			    (AM_PATH_GIMPPRINT) and gimpprint-config
			    needed to develop programs that link with
			    libgimpprint.
    gimpprint-doc	    User's Guide in HTML and PDF format
    libgimpprint-doc	    Programmer's Guide in Info, DVI and HTML
			    format.
    gimpprint-locales	    Message catalogues for internationalisation.
    escputil		    The escputil printer tool for Epson printers.

    The library symlinks will get packaged without any modification needed
    to the debian packaging whatever library versioning scheme is
    used.  Most packages depend on libgimpprint as this will provide
    translations for i18n in the future that they will use, or they
    require libgimpprint anyway.

    The newer Debian gs packages (>= 5.50) are linked with libgimpprint, so
    you need not do any patching!  However, if you compile a newer version
    of libgimpprint, the newer version will be used by ghostscript.


USE OF THE CVS REPOSITORY

    Please read doc/README.maintaining for instructions on how to
    build from the CVS repository.
