This is ../info/emacs, produced by makeinfo version 4.0 from emacs.texi.

   This is the Fourteenth edition of the `GNU Emacs Manual', updated
for Emacs version 21.1.

INFO-DIR-SECTION Emacs
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Emacs: (emacs).	The extensible self-documenting text editor.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY

   Published by the Free Software Foundation 59 Temple Place, Suite 330
Boston, MA  02111-1307 USA

   Copyright (C) 1985,
1986,1987,1993,1994,1995,1996,1997,1998,1999,2000,2001    Free Software
Foundation, Inc.

   Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being "The GNU Manifesto", "Distribution" and "GNU
GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE", with the Front-Cover texts being "A GNU
Manual," and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation
License."

   (a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: "You have freedom to copy and
modify this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by the Free
Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development."


File: emacs,  Node: Glossary,  Next: Key Index,  Prev: Intro,  Up: Top

Glossary
********

Abbrev
     An abbrev is a text string which expands into a different text
     string when present in the buffer.  For example, you might define
     a few letters as an abbrev for a long phrase that you want to
     insert frequently.  *Note Abbrevs::.

Aborting
     Aborting means getting out of a recursive edit (q.v.).  The
     commands `C-]' and `M-x top-level' are used for this.  *Note
     Quitting::.

Alt
     Alt is the name of a modifier bit which a keyboard input character
     may have.  To make a character Alt, type it while holding down the
     <ALT> key.  Such characters are given names that start with `Alt-'
     (usually written `A-' for short).  (Note that many terminals have a
     key labeled <ALT> which is really a <META> key.)  *Note Alt: User
     Input.

Argument
     See `numeric argument.'

ASCII character
     An ASCII character is either an ASCII control character or an ASCII
     printing character.  *Note User Input::.

ASCII control character
     An ASCII control character is the Control version of an upper-case
     letter, or the Control version of one of the characters `@[\]^_?'.

ASCII printing character
     ASCII printing characters include letters, digits, space, and these
     punctuation characters: `!@#$%^& *()_-+=|\~` {}[]:;"' <>,.?/'.

Auto Fill Mode
     Auto Fill mode is a minor mode in which text that you insert is
     automatically broken into lines of a given maximum width.  *Note
     Filling::.

Auto Saving
     Auto saving is the practice of saving the contents of an Emacs
     buffer in a specially-named file, so that the information will not
     be lost if the buffer is lost due to a system error or user error.
     *Note Auto Save::.

Autoloading
     Emacs automatically loads Lisp libraries when a Lisp program
     requests a function or a variable from those libraries.  This is
     called `autoloading'.  *Note Lisp Libraries::.

Backtrace
     A backtrace is a trace of a series of function calls showing how a
     program arrived to a certain point.  It is used mainly for finding
     and correcting bugs (q.v.).  Emacs can display a backtrace when it
     signals an error or when you type `C-g' (see `quitting').  *Note
     Checklist::.

Backup File
     A backup file records the contents that a file had before the
     current editing session.  Emacs makes backup files automatically
     to help you track down or cancel changes you later regret making.
     *Note Backup::.

Balance Parentheses
     Emacs can balance parentheses (or other matching delimiters) either
     manually or automatically.  You do manual balancing with the
     commands to move over parenthetical groupings (*note Moving by
     Parens::).  Automatic balancing works by blinking or highlighting
     the delimiter that matches the one you just inserted (*note
     Matching Parens: Matching.).

Balanced Expressions
     A balanced expression is a syntactically recognizable expression,
     such as a symbol, number, string constant, block, or parenthesized
     expression in C.  *Note Balanced Expressions: Expressions.

Balloon Help
     See `tooltips.'

Base Buffer
     A base buffer is a buffer whose text is shared by an indirect
     buffer (q.v.).

Bind
     To bind a key sequence means to give it a binding (q.v.).  *Note
     Rebinding::.

Binding
     A key sequence gets its meaning in Emacs by having a binding,
     which is a command (q.v.), a Lisp function that is run when the
     user types that sequence.  *Note Binding: Commands.  Customization
     often involves rebinding a character to a different command
     function.  The bindings of all key sequences are recorded in the
     keymaps (q.v.).  *Note Keymaps::.

Blank Lines
     Blank lines are lines that contain only whitespace.  Emacs has
     several commands for operating on the blank lines in the buffer.

Bookmark
     Bookmarks are akin to registers (q.v.) in that they record
     positions in buffers to which you can return later.  Unlike
     registers, bookmarks persist between Emacs sessions.

Buffer
     The buffer is the basic editing unit; one buffer corresponds to
     one text being edited.  You can have several buffers, but at any
     time you are editing only one, the `current buffer,' though
     several can be visible when you are using multiple windows (q.v.).
     Most buffers are visiting (q.v.) some file.  *Note Buffers::.

Buffer Selection History
     Emacs keeps a buffer selection history which records how recently
     each Emacs buffer has been selected.  This is used for choosing a
     buffer to select.  *Note Buffers::.

Bug
     A bug is an incorrect or unreasonable behavior of a program, or
     inaccurate or confusing documentation.  Emacs developers treat bug
     reports, both in Emacs code and its documentation, very seriously
     and ask you to report any bugs you find.  *Note Bugs::.

Button Down Event
     A button down event is the kind of input event generated right
     away when you press down on a mouse button.  *Note Mouse Buttons::.

By Default
     See `default.'

`C-'
     `C-' in the name of a character is an abbreviation for Control.
     *Note C-: User Input.

`C-M-'
     `C-M-' in the name of a character is an abbreviation for
     Control-Meta.  *Note C-M-: User Input.

Case Conversion
     Case conversion means changing text from upper case to lower case
     or vice versa.  *Note Case::, for the commands for case conversion.

Character
     Characters form the contents of an Emacs buffer; see *Note Text
     Characters::.  Also, key sequences (q.v.) are usually made up of
     characters (though they may include other input events as well).
     *Note User Input::.

Character Set
     Emacs supports a number of character sets, each of which
     represents a particular alphabet or script.  *Note International::.

Character Terminal
     See `text-only terminal.'

Click Event
     A click event is the kind of input event generated when you press a
     mouse button and release it without moving the mouse.  *Note Mouse
     Buttons::.

Clipboard
     A clipboard is a buffer provided by the window system for
     transferring text between applications.  On the X Window system,
     the clipboard is provided in addition to the primary selection
     (q.v.); on MS-Windows, the clipboard is used _instead_ of the
     primary selection.  *Note Clipboard::.

Coding System
     A coding system is an encoding for representing text characters in
     a file or in a stream of information.  Emacs has the ability to
     convert text to or from a variety of coding systems when reading
     or writing it.  *Note Coding Systems::.

Command
     A command is a Lisp function specially defined to be able to serve
     as a key binding in Emacs.  When you type a key sequence (q.v.),
     its binding (q.v.) is looked up in the relevant keymaps (q.v.) to
     find the command to run.  *Note Commands::.

Command History
     See `minibuffer history.'

Command Name
     A command name is the name of a Lisp symbol which is a command
     (*note Commands::).  You can invoke any command by its name using
     `M-x' (*note M-x: M-x.).

Comment
     A comment is text in a program which is intended only for humans
     reading the program, and which is marked specially so that it will
     be ignored when the program is loaded or compiled.  Emacs offers
     special commands for creating, aligning and killing comments.
     *Note Comments::.

Common Lisp
     Common Lisp is a dialect of Lisp (q.v.) much larger and more
     powerful than Emacs Lisp.  Emacs provides a subset of Common Lisp
     in the CL package.  *Note Common Lisp: (cl)Common Lisp.

Compilation
     Compilation is the process of creating an executable program from
     source code.  Emacs has commands for compiling files of Emacs Lisp
     code (*note Byte Compilation: (elisp)Byte Compilation.) and
     programs in C and other languages (*note Compilation::).

Complete Key
     A complete key is a key sequence which fully specifies one action
     to be performed by Emacs.  For example, `X' and `C-f' and `C-x m'
     are complete keys.  Complete keys derive their meanings from being
     bound (q.v.) to commands (q.v.).  Thus, `X' is conventionally
     bound to a command to insert `X' in the buffer; `C-x m' is
     conventionally bound to a command to begin composing a mail
     message.  *Note Keys::.

Completion
     Completion is what Emacs does when it automatically fills out an
     abbreviation for a name into the entire name.  Completion is done
     for minibuffer (q.v.) arguments when the set of possible valid
     inputs is known; for example, on command names, buffer names, and
     file names.  Completion occurs when <TAB>, <SPC> or <RET> is
     typed.  *Note Completion::.

Continuation Line
     When a line of text is longer than the width of the window, it
     takes up more than one screen line when displayed.  We say that the
     text line is continued, and all screen lines used for it after the
     first are called continuation lines.  *Note Continuation: Basic.
     A related Emacs feature is `filling' (q.v.).

Control Character
     A control character is a character that you type by holding down
     the <CTRL> key.  Some control characters also have their own keys,
     so that you can type them without using <CTRL>.  For example,
     <RET>, <TAB>, <ESC> and <DEL> are all control characters.  *Note
     User Input::.

Copyleft
     A copyleft is a notice giving the public legal permission to
     redistribute a program or other work of art.  Copylefts are used by
     left-wing programmers to promote freedom and cooperation, just as
     copyrights are used by right-wing programmers to gain power over
     other people.

     The particular form of copyleft used by the GNU project is called
     the GNU General Public License.  *Note Copying::.

Current Buffer
     The current buffer in Emacs is the Emacs buffer on which most
     editing commands operate.  You can select any Emacs buffer as the
     current one.  *Note Buffers::.

Current Line
     The current line is a line point is on (*note Point::).

Current Paragraph
     The current paragraph is the paragraph that point is in.  If point
     is between two paragraphs, the current paragraph is the one that
     follows point.  *Note Paragraphs::.

Current Defun
     The current defun is the defun (q.v.) that point is in.  If point
     is between defuns, the current defun is the one that follows point.
     *Note Defuns::.

Cursor
     The cursor is the rectangle on the screen which indicates the
     position called point (q.v.) at which insertion and deletion takes
     place.  The cursor is on or under the character that follows
     point.  Often people speak of `the cursor' when, strictly
     speaking, they mean `point.'  *Note Cursor: Basic.

Customization
     Customization is making minor changes in the way Emacs works.  It
     is often done by setting variables (*note Variables::) or by
     rebinding key sequences (*note Keymaps::).

Cut and Paste
     See `killing' and `yanking.'

Default Argument
     The default for an argument is the value that will be assumed if
     you do not specify one.  When the minibuffer is used to read an
     argument, the default argument is used if you just type <RET>.
     *Note Minibuffer::.

Default
     A default is the value that is used for a certain purpose if and
     when you do not specify a value to use.

Default Directory
     When you specify a file name that does not start with `/' or `~',
     it is interpreted relative to the current buffer's default
     directory.  (On MS-Windows and MS-DOS, file names which start with
     a drive letter `X:' are treated as absolute, not relative.)  *Note
     Default Directory: Minibuffer File.

Defun
     A defun is a major definition at the top level in a program.  The
     name `defun' comes from Lisp, where most such definitions use the
     construct `defun'.  *Note Defuns::.

<DEL>
     <DEL> is a character that runs the command to delete one character
     of text.  *Note DEL: Basic.

Deletion
     Deletion means erasing text without copying it into the kill ring
     (q.v.).  The alternative is killing (q.v.).  *Note Deletion:
     Killing.

Deletion of Files
     Deleting a file means erasing it from the file system.  *Note Misc
     File Ops: Misc File Ops.

Deletion of Messages
     Deleting a message means flagging it to be eliminated from your
     mail file.  Until you expunge (q.v.) the Rmail file, you can still
     undelete the messages you have deleted.  *Note Rmail Deletion::.

Deletion of Windows
     Deleting a window means eliminating it from the screen.  Other
     windows expand to use up the space.  The deleted window can never
     come back, but no actual text is thereby lost.  *Note Windows::.

Directory
     File directories are named collections in the file system, within
     which you can place individual files or subdirectories.  *Note
     Directories::.

Dired
     Dired is the Emacs facility that displays the contents of a file
     directory and allows you to "edit the directory," performing
     operations on the files in the directory.  *Note Dired::.

Disabled Command
     A disabled command is one that you may not run without special
     confirmation.  The usual reason for disabling a command is that it
     is confusing for beginning users.  *Note Disabling::.

Down Event
     Short for `button down event' (q.v.).

Drag Event
     A drag event is the kind of input event generated when you press a
     mouse button, move the mouse, and then release the button.  *Note
     Mouse Buttons::.

Dribble File
     A dribble file is a file into which Emacs writes all the
     characters that the user types on the keyboard.  Dribble files are
     used to make a record for debugging Emacs bugs.  Emacs does not
     make a dribble file unless you tell it to.  *Note Bugs::.

Echo Area
     The echo area is the bottom line of the screen, used for echoing
     the arguments to commands, for asking questions, and showing brief
     messages (including error messages).  The messages are stored in
     the buffer `*Messages*' so you can review them later.  *Note Echo
     Area::.

Echoing
     Echoing is acknowledging the receipt of commands by displaying
     them (in the echo area).  Emacs never echoes single-character key
     sequences; longer key sequences echo only if you pause while
     typing them.

Electric
     We say that a character is electric if it is normally
     self-inserting (q.v.), but the current major mode (q.v.) redefines
     it to do something else as well.  For example, some programming
     language major modes define particular delimiter characters to
     reindent the line or insert one or more newlines in addition to
     self-insertion.

End Of Line
     End of line is a character or a sequence of characters that
     indicate the end of a text line.  On GNU and Unix systems, this is
     a newline (q.v.), but other systems have other conventions.  *Note
     end-of-line: Coding Systems.  Emacs can recognize several
     end-of-line conventions in files and convert between them.

Environment Variable
     An environment variable is one of a collection of variables stored
     by the operating system, each one having a name and a value.
     Emacs can access environment variables set by its parent shell,
     and it can set variables in the environment it passes to programs
     it invokes.  *Note Environment::.

EOL
     See `end of line.'

Error
     An error occurs when an Emacs command cannot execute in the current
     circumstances.  When an error occurs, execution of the command
     stops (unless the command has been programmed to do otherwise) and
     Emacs reports the error by displaying an error message (q.v.).
     Type-ahead is discarded.  Then Emacs is ready to read another
     editing command.

Error Message
     An error message is a single line of output displayed by Emacs
     when the user asks for something impossible to do (such as,
     killing text forward when point is at the end of the buffer).
     They appear in the echo area, accompanied by a beep.

<ESC>
     <ESC> is a character used as a prefix for typing Meta characters on
     keyboards lacking a <META> key.  Unlike the <META> key (which,
     like the <SHIFT> key, is held down while another character is
     typed), you press the <ESC> key as you would press a letter key,
     and it applies to the next character you type.

Expression
     See `balanced expression.'

Expunging
     Expunging an Rmail file or Dired buffer or a Gnus newsgroup buffer
     is an operation that truly discards the messages or files you have
     previously flagged for deletion.

Face
     A face is a style of displaying characters.  It specifies
     attributes such as font family and size, foreground and background
     colors, underline and strike-through, background stipple, etc.
     Emacs provides features to associate specific faces with portions
     of buffer text, in order to display that text as specified by the
     face attributes.

File Locking
     Emacs uses file locking to notice when two different users start
     to edit one file at the same time.  *Note Interlocking::.

File Name
     A file name is a name that refers to a file.  File names may be
     relative or absolute; the meaning of a relative file name depends
     on the current directory, but an absolute file name refers to the
     same file regardless of which directory is current.  On GNU and
     Unix systems, an absolute file name starts with a slash (the root
     directory) or with `~/' or `~USER/' (a home directory).  On
     MS-Windows/MS-DOS, and absolute file name can also start with a
     drive letter and a colon `D:'.

     Some people use the term "pathname" for file names, but we do not;
     we use the word "path" only in the term "search path" (q.v.).

File-Name Component
     A file-name component names a file directly within a particular
     directory.  On GNU and Unix systems, a file name is a sequence of
     file-name components, separated by slashes.  For example, `foo/bar'
     is a file name containing two components, `foo' and `bar'; it
     refers to the file named `bar' in the directory named `foo' in the
     current directory.  MS-DOS/MS-Windows file names can also use
     backslashes to separate components, as in `foo\bar'.

Fill Prefix
     The fill prefix is a string that should be expected at the
     beginning of each line when filling is done.  It is not regarded
     as part of the text to be filled.  *Note Filling::.

Filling
     Filling text means shifting text between consecutive lines so that
     all the lines are approximately the same length.  *Note Filling::.
     Some other editors call this feature `line wrapping.'

Font Lock
     Font Lock is a mode that highlights parts of buffer text according
     to its syntax.  *Note Font Lock::.

Fontset
     A fontset is a named collection of fonts.  A fontset specification
     lists character sets and which font to use to display each of
     them.  Fontsets make it easy to change several fonts at once by
     specifying the name of a fontset, rather than changing each font
     separately.  *Note Fontsets::.

Formatted Text
     Formatted text is text that displays with formatting information
     while you edit.  Formatting information includes fonts, colors,
     and specified margins.  *Note Formatted Text::.

Formfeed Character
     See `page.'

Frame
     A frame is a rectangular cluster of Emacs windows.  Emacs starts
     out with one frame, but you can create more.  You can subdivide
     each frame into Emacs windows (q.v.).  When you are using a
     windowing system, all the frames can be visible at the same time.
     *Note Frames::.  Some other editors use the term "window" for
     this, but in Emacs a window means something else.

Fringe
     On windowed displays, there's a narrow portion of the frame (q.v.)
     between the text area and the window's border.  Emacs displays the
     fringe using a special face (q.v.) called `fringe'.  *Note fringe:
     Faces.

FTP
     FTP is an acronym for File Transfer Protocol.  Emacs uses an FTP
     client program to provide access to remote files (q.v.).

Function Key
     A function key is a key on the keyboard that sends input but does
     not correspond to any character.  *Note Function Keys::.

Global
     Global means "independent of the current environment; in effect
     throughout Emacs."  It is the opposite of local (q.v.).  Particular
     examples of the use of `global' appear below.

Global Abbrev
     A global definition of an abbrev (q.v.) is effective in all major
     modes that do not have local (q.v.) definitions for the same
     abbrev.  *Note Abbrevs::.

Global Keymap
     The global keymap (q.v.) contains key bindings that are in effect
     except when overridden by local key bindings in a major mode's
     local keymap (q.v.).  *Note Keymaps::.

Global Mark Ring
     The global mark ring records the series of buffers you have
     recently set a mark (q.v.) in.  In many cases you can use this to
     backtrack through buffers you have been editing in, or in which
     you have found tags (see `tags table').  *Note Global Mark Ring::.

Global Substitution
     Global substitution means replacing each occurrence of one string
     by another string throughout a large amount of text.  *Note
     Replace::.

Global Variable
     The global value of a variable (q.v.) takes effect in all buffers
     that do not have their own local (q.v.) values for the variable.
     *Note Variables::.

Graphic Character
     Graphic characters are those assigned pictorial images rather than
     just names.  All the non-Meta (q.v.) characters except for the
     Control (q.v.) characters are graphic characters.  These include
     letters, digits, punctuation, and spaces; they do not include
     <RET> or <ESC>.  In Emacs, typing a graphic character inserts that
     character (in ordinary editing modes).  *Note Basic Editing: Basic.

Highlighting
     Highlighting text means displaying it with a different foreground
     and/or background color to make it stand out from the rest of the
     text in the buffer.

Hardcopy
     Hardcopy means printed output.  Emacs has commands for making
     printed listings of text in Emacs buffers.  *Note Hardcopy::.

<HELP>
     <HELP> is the Emacs name for `C-h' or <F1>.  You can type <HELP>
     at any time to ask what options you have, or to ask what any
     command does.  *Note Help::.

Help Echo
     Help echo is a short message displayed in the echo area when the
     mouse pointer is located on portions of display that require some
     explanations.  Emacs displays help echo for menu items, parts of
     the mode line, tool-bar buttons, etc.  On graphics displays, the
     messages can be displayed as tooltips (q.v.).  *Note Tooltips::.

Hook
     A hook is a list of functions to be called on specific occasions,
     such as saving a buffer in a file, major mode activation, etc.  By
     customizing the various hooks, you can modify Emacs's behavior
     without changing any of its code.  *Note Hooks::.

Hyper
     Hyper is the name of a modifier bit which a keyboard input
     character may have.  To make a character Hyper, type it while
     holding down the <HYPER> key.  Such characters are given names
     that start with `Hyper-' (usually written `H-' for short).  *Note
     Hyper: User Input.

Inbox
     An inbox is a file in which mail is delivered by the operating
     system.  Rmail transfers mail from inboxes to Rmail files (q.v.)
     in which the mail is then stored permanently or until explicitly
     deleted.  *Note Rmail Inbox::.

Incremental Search
     Emacs provides an incremental search facility, whereby Emacs
     searches for the string as you type it.  *Note Incremental
     Search::.

Indentation
     Indentation means blank space at the beginning of a line.  Most
     programming languages have conventions for using indentation to
     illuminate the structure of the program, and Emacs has special
     commands to adjust indentation.  *Note Indentation::.

Indirect Buffer
     An indirect buffer is a buffer that shares the text of another
     buffer, called its base buffer (q.v.).  *Note Indirect Buffers::.

Info
     Info is the hypertext format used by the GNU project for writing
     documentation.

Input Event
     An input event represents, within Emacs, one action taken by the
     user on the terminal.  Input events include typing characters,
     typing function keys, pressing or releasing mouse buttons, and
     switching between Emacs frames.  *Note User Input::.

Input Method
     An input method is a system for entering non-ASCII text characters
     by typing sequences of ASCII characters (q.v.).  *Note Input
     Methods::.

Insertion
     Insertion means copying text into the buffer, either from the
     keyboard or from some other place in Emacs.

Interlocking
     Interlocking is a feature for warning when you start to alter a
     file that someone else is already editing.  *Note Interlocking:
     Interlocking.

Isearch
     See `incremental search.'

Justification
     Justification means adding extra spaces within lines of text to
     make them extend exactly to a specified width.  *Note
     Justification: Filling.

Keyboard Macro
     Keyboard macros are a way of defining new Emacs commands from
     sequences of existing ones, with no need to write a Lisp program.
     *Note Keyboard Macros::.

Keyboard Shortcut
     A keyboard shortcut is a key sequence (q.v.) which invokes a
     command.  What other programs call "assign a keyboard shortcut"
     Emacs calls "bind a key sequence".  See `binding.'

Key Sequence
     A key sequence (key, for short) is a sequence of input events
     (q.v.)  that are meaningful as a single unit.  If the key sequence
     is enough to specify one action, it is a complete key (q.v.); if
     it is not enough, it is a prefix key (q.v.).  *Note Keys::.

Keymap
     The keymap is the data structure that records the bindings (q.v.)
     of key sequences to the commands that they run.  For example, the
     global keymap binds the character `C-n' to the command function
     `next-line'.  *Note Keymaps::.

Keyboard Translation Table
     The keyboard translation table is an array that translates the
     character codes that come from the terminal into the character
     codes that make up key sequences.  *Note Keyboard Translations::.

Kill Ring
     The kill ring is where all text you have killed recently is saved.
     You can reinsert any of the killed text still in the ring; this is
     called yanking (q.v.).  *Note Yanking::.

Killing
     Killing means erasing text and saving it on the kill ring so it
     can be yanked (q.v.) later.  Some other systems call this
     "cutting."  Most Emacs commands that erase text perform killing,
     as opposed to deletion (q.v.).  *Note Killing::.

Killing a Job
     Killing a job (such as, an invocation of Emacs) means making it
     cease to exist.  Any data within it, if not saved in a file, is
     lost.  *Note Exiting::.

Language Environment
     Your choice of language environment specifies defaults for the
     input method (q.v.) and coding system (q.v.).  *Note Language
     Environments::.  These defaults are relevant if you edit non-ASCII
     text (*note International::).

Line Wrapping
     See `filling.'

Lisp
     Lisp is a programming language.  Most of Emacs is written in a
     dialect of Lisp, called Emacs Lisp, that is extended with special
     features which make it especially suitable for text editing tasks.

List
     A list is, approximately, a text string beginning with an open
     parenthesis and ending with the matching close parenthesis.  In C
     mode and other non-Lisp modes, groupings surrounded by other kinds
     of matched delimiters appropriate to the language, such as braces,
     are also considered lists.  Emacs has special commands for many
     operations on lists.  *Note Moving by Parens::.

Local
     Local means "in effect only in a particular context"; the relevant
     kind of context is a particular function execution, a particular
     buffer, or a particular major mode.  It is the opposite of `global'
     (q.v.).  Specific uses of `local' in Emacs terminology appear
     below.

Local Abbrev
     A local abbrev definition is effective only if a particular major
     mode is selected.  In that major mode, it overrides any global
     definition for the same abbrev.  *Note Abbrevs::.

Local Keymap
     A local keymap is used in a particular major mode; the key bindings
     (q.v.) in the current local keymap override global bindings of the
     same key sequences.  *Note Keymaps::.

Local Variable
     A local value of a variable (q.v.) applies to only one buffer.
     *Note Locals::.

`M-'
     `M-' in the name of a character is an abbreviation for <META>, one
     of the modifier keys that can accompany any character.  *Note User
     Input::.

`M-C-'
     `M-C-' in the name of a character is an abbreviation for
     Control-Meta; it means the same thing as `C-M-'.  If your terminal
     lacks a real <META> key, you type a Control-Meta character by
     typing <ESC> and then typing the corresponding Control character.
     *Note C-M-: User Input.

`M-x'
     `M-x' is the key sequence which is used to call an Emacs command by
     name.  This is how you run commands that are not bound to key
     sequences.  *Note M-x: M-x.

Mail
     Mail means messages sent from one user to another through the
     computer system, to be read at the recipient's convenience.  Emacs
     has commands for composing and sending mail, and for reading and
     editing the mail you have received.  *Note Sending Mail::.  *Note
     Rmail::, for how to read mail.

Mail Composition Method
     A mail composition method is a program runnable within Emacs for
     editing and sending a mail message.  Emacs lets you select from
     several alternative mail composition methods.  *Note Mail
     Methods::.

Major Mode
     The Emacs major modes are a mutually exclusive set of options,
     each of which configures Emacs for editing a certain sort of text.
     Ideally, each programming language has its own major mode.  *Note
     Major Modes::.

Mark
     The mark points to a position in the text.  It specifies one end
     of the region (q.v.), point being the other end.  Many commands
     operate on all the text from point to the mark.  Each buffer has
     its own mark.  *Note Mark::.

Mark Ring
     The mark ring is used to hold several recent previous locations of
     the mark, just in case you want to move back to them.  Each buffer
     has its own mark ring; in addition, there is a single global mark
     ring (q.v.).  *Note Mark Ring::.

Menu Bar
     The menu bar is the line at the top of an Emacs frame.  It contains
     words you can click on with the mouse to bring up menus, or you
     can use a keyboard interface to navigate it.  *Note Menu Bars::.

Message
     See `mail.'

Meta
     Meta is the name of a modifier bit which a command character may
     have.  It is present in a character if the character is typed with
     the <META> key held down.  Such characters are given names that
     start with `Meta-' (usually written `M-' for short).  For example,
     `M-<' is typed by holding down <META> and at the same time typing
     `<' (which itself is done, on most terminals, by holding down
     <SHIFT> and typing `,').  *Note Meta: User Input.

Meta Character
     A Meta character is one whose character code includes the Meta bit.

Minibuffer
     The minibuffer is the window that appears when necessary inside the
     echo area (q.v.), used for reading arguments to commands.  *Note
     Minibuffer::.

Minibuffer History
     The minibuffer history records the text you have specified in the
     past for minibuffer arguments, so you can conveniently use the
     same text again.  *Note Minibuffer History::.

Minor Mode
     A minor mode is an optional feature of Emacs which can be switched
     on or off independently of all other features.  Each minor mode
     has a command to turn it on or off.  *Note Minor Modes::.

Minor Mode Keymap
     A minor mode keymap is a keymap that belongs to a minor mode and is
     active when that mode is enabled.  Minor mode keymaps take
     precedence over the buffer's local keymap, just as the local
     keymap takes precedence over the global keymap.  *Note Keymaps::.

Mode Line
     The mode line is the line at the bottom of each window (q.v.),
     giving status information on the buffer displayed in that window.
     *Note Mode Line::.

Modified Buffer
     A buffer (q.v.) is modified if its text has been changed since the
     last time the buffer was saved (or since when it was created, if it
     has never been saved).  *Note Saving::.

Moving Text
     Moving text means erasing it from one place and inserting it in
     another.  The usual way to move text by killing (q.v.) and then
     yanking (q.v.).  *Note Killing::.

MULE
     MULE refers to the Emacs features for editing multilingual
     non-ASCII text using multibyte characters (q.v.).  *Note
     International::.

Multibyte Character
     A multibyte character is a character that takes up several bytes
     in a buffer.  Emacs uses multibyte characters to represent
     non-ASCII text, since the number of non-ASCII characters is much
     more than 256.  *Note International Characters: International
     Chars.

Named Mark
     A named mark is a register (q.v.) in its role of recording a
     location in text so that you can move point to that location.
     *Note Registers::.

Narrowing
     Narrowing means creating a restriction (q.v.) that limits editing
     in the current buffer to only a part of the text in the buffer.
     Text outside that part is inaccessible to the user until the
     boundaries are widened again, but it is still there, and saving
     the file saves it all.  *Note Narrowing::.

Newline
     Control-J characters in the buffer terminate lines of text and are
     therefore also called newlines.  *Note Newline: Text Characters.

`nil'
     `nil' is a value usually interpreted as a logical "false."  Its
     opposite is `t', interpreted as "true."

Numeric Argument
     A numeric argument is a number, specified before a command, to
     change the effect of the command.  Often the numeric argument
     serves as a repeat count.  *Note Arguments::.

Overwrite Mode
     Overwrite mode is a minor mode.  When it is enabled, ordinary text
     characters replace the existing text after point rather than
     pushing it to the right.  *Note Minor Modes::.

Page
     A page is a unit of text, delimited by formfeed characters (ASCII
     control-L, code 014) coming at the beginning of a line.  Some Emacs
     commands are provided for moving over and operating on pages.
     *Note Pages::.

Paragraph
     Paragraphs are the medium-size unit of human-language text.  There
     are special Emacs commands for moving over and operating on
     paragraphs.  *Note Paragraphs::.

Parsing
     We say that certain Emacs commands parse words or expressions in
     the text being edited.  Really, all they know how to do is find
     the other end of a word or expression.  *Note Syntax::.

Point
     Point is the place in the buffer at which insertion and deletion
     occur.  Point is considered to be between two characters, not at
     one character.  The terminal's cursor (q.v.) indicates the
     location of point.  *Note Point: Basic.

Prefix Argument
     See `numeric argument.'

Prefix Key
     A prefix key is a key sequence (q.v.) whose sole function is to
     introduce a set of longer key sequences.  `C-x' is an example of
     prefix key; any two-character sequence starting with `C-x' is
     therefore a legitimate key sequence.  *Note Keys::.

Primary Rmail File
     Your primary Rmail file is the file named `RMAIL' in your home
     directory.  That's where Rmail stores your incoming mail, unless
     you specify a different file name.  *Note Rmail::.

Primary Selection
     The primary selection is one particular X selection (q.v.); it is
     the selection that most X applications use for transferring text
     to and from other applications.

     The Emacs kill commands set the primary selection and the yank
     command uses the primary selection when appropriate.  *Note
     Killing::.

Prompt
     A prompt is text used to ask the user for input.  Displaying a
     prompt is called prompting.  Emacs prompts always appear in the
     echo area (q.v.).  One kind of prompting happens when the
     minibuffer is used to read an argument (*note Minibuffer::); the
     echoing which happens when you pause in the middle of typing a
     multi-character key sequence is also a kind of prompting (*note
     Echo Area::).

Query-Replace
     Query-replace is an interactive string replacement feature
     provided by Emacs.  *Note Query Replace::.

Quitting
     Quitting means canceling a partially typed command or a running
     command, using `C-g' (or `C-<BREAK>' on MS-DOS).  *Note Quitting::.

Quoting
     Quoting means depriving a character of its usual special
     significance.  The most common kind of quoting in Emacs is with
     `C-q'.  What constitutes special significance depends on the
     context and on convention.  For example, an "ordinary" character
     as an Emacs command inserts itself; so in this context, a special
     character is any character that does not normally insert itself
     (such as <DEL>, for example), and quoting it makes it insert
     itself as if it were not special.  Not all contexts allow quoting.
     *Note Quoting: Basic.

Quoting File Names
     Quoting a file name turns off the special significance of
     constructs such as `$', `~' and `:'.  *Note Quoted File Names::.

Read-Only Buffer
     A read-only buffer is one whose text you are not allowed to change.
     Normally Emacs makes buffers read-only when they contain text which
     has a special significance to Emacs; for example, Dired buffers.
     Visiting a file that is write-protected also makes a read-only
     buffer.  *Note Buffers::.

Rectangle
     A rectangle consists of the text in a given range of columns on a
     given range of lines.  Normally you specify a rectangle by putting
     point at one corner and putting the mark at the diagonally
     opposite corner.  *Note Rectangles::.

Recursive Editing Level
     A recursive editing level is a state in which part of the
     execution of a command involves asking the user to edit some text.
     This text may or may not be the same as the text to which the
     command was applied.  The mode line indicates recursive editing
     levels with square brackets (`[' and `]').  *Note Recursive Edit::.

Redisplay
     Redisplay is the process of correcting the image on the screen to
     correspond to changes that have been made in the text being edited.
     *Note Redisplay: Screen.

Regexp
     See `regular expression.'

Region
     The region is the text between point (q.v.) and the mark (q.v.).
     Many commands operate on the text of the region.  *Note Region:
     Mark.

Registers
     Registers are named slots in which text or buffer positions or
     rectangles can be saved for later use.  *Note Registers::.  A
     related Emacs feature is `bookmarks' (q.v.).

Regular Expression
     A regular expression is a pattern that can match various text
     strings; for example, `a[0-9]+' matches `a' followed by one or more
     digits.  *Note Regexps::.

Remote File
     A remote file is a file that is stored on a system other than your
     own.  Emacs can access files on other computers provided that they
     are connected to the same network as your machine, and (obviously)
     that you have a supported method to gain access to those files.
     *Note Remote Files::.

Repeat Count
     See `numeric argument.'

Replacement
     See `global substitution.'

Restriction
     A buffer's restriction is the amount of text, at the beginning or
     the end of the buffer, that is temporarily inaccessible.  Giving a
     buffer a nonzero amount of restriction is called narrowing (q.v.);
     removing a restriction is called widening (q.v.).  *Note
     Narrowing::.

<RET>
     <RET> is a character that in Emacs runs the command to insert a
     newline into the text.  It is also used to terminate most arguments
     read in the minibuffer (q.v.).  *Note Return: User Input.

Reverting
     Reverting means returning to the original state.  Emacs lets you
     revert a buffer by re-reading its file from disk.  *Note
     Reverting::.

Rmail File
     An Rmail file is a file containing text in a special format used by
     Rmail for storing mail.  *Note Rmail::.

Saving
     Saving a buffer means copying its text into the file that was
     visited (q.v.) in that buffer.  This is the way text in files
     actually gets changed by your Emacs editing.  *Note Saving::.

Scroll Bar
     A scroll bar is a tall thin hollow box that appears at the side of
     a window.  You can use mouse commands in the scroll bar to scroll
     the window.  The scroll bar feature is supported only under
     windowing systems.  *Note Scroll Bars::.

Scrolling
     Scrolling means shifting the text in the Emacs window so as to see
     a different part of the buffer.  *Note Scrolling: Display.

Searching
     Searching means moving point to the next occurrence of a specified
     string or the next match for a specified regular expression.
     *Note Search::.

Search Path
     A search path is a list of directory names, to be used for
     searching for files for certain purposes.  For example, the
     variable `load-path' holds a search path for finding Lisp library
     files.  *Note Lisp Libraries::.

Secondary Selection
     The secondary selection is one particular X selection; some X
     applications can use it for transferring text to and from other
     applications.  Emacs has special mouse commands for transferring
     text using the secondary selection.  *Note Secondary Selection::.

Selecting
     Selecting a buffer means making it the current (q.v.) buffer.
     *Note Selecting: Buffers.

Selection
     Windowing systems allow an application program to specify
     selections whose values are text.  A program can also read the
     selections that other programs have set up.  This is the principal
     way of transferring text between window applications.  Emacs has
     commands to work with the primary (q.v.) selection and the
     secondary (q.v.)  selection, and also with the clipboard (q.v.).

Self-Documentation
     Self-documentation is the feature of Emacs which can tell you what
     any command does, or give you a list of all commands related to a
     topic you specify.  You ask for self-documentation with the help
     character, `C-h'.  *Note Help::.

Self-Inserting Character
     A character is self-inserting if typing that character inserts that
     character in the buffer.  Ordinary printing and whitespace
     characters are self-inserting in Emacs, except in certain special
     major modes.

Sentences
     Emacs has commands for moving by or killing by sentences.  *Note
     Sentences::.

Sexp
     A sexp (short for "s-expression") is the basic syntactic unit of
     Lisp in its textual form: either a list, or Lisp atom.  Sexps are
     also the balanced expressions (q.v.) of the Lisp language; this is
     why the commands for editing balanced expressions have `sexp' in
     their name.  *Note Sexps: Expressions.

Simultaneous Editing
     Simultaneous editing means two users modifying the same file at
     once.  Simultaneous editing, if not detected, can cause one user
     to lose his or her work.  Emacs detects all cases of simultaneous
     editing, and warns one of the users to investigate.  *Note
     Interlocking: Interlocking.

Speedbar
     Speedbar is a special tall frame that provides fast access to Emacs
     buffers, functions within those buffers, Info nodes, and other
     interesting parts of text within Emacs.  *Note Speedbar::.

Spell Checking
     Spell checking means checking correctness of the written form of
     each one of the words in a text.  Emacs uses the Ispell
     spelling-checker program to check the spelling of parts of a
     buffer via a convenient user interface.  *Note Spelling::.

String
     A string is a kind of Lisp data object which contains a sequence of
     characters.  Many Emacs variables are intended to have strings as
     values.  The Lisp syntax for a string consists of the characters
     in the string with a `"' before and another `"' after.  A `"' that
     is part of the string must be written as `\"' and a `\' that is
     part of the string must be written as `\\'.  All other characters,
     including newline, can be included just by writing them inside the
     string; however, backslash sequences as in C, such as `\n' for
     newline or `\241' using an octal character code, are allowed as
     well.

String Substitution
     See `global substitution'.

Syntax Highlighting
     See `font lock.'

Syntax Table
     The syntax table tells Emacs which characters are part of a word,
     which characters balance each other like parentheses, etc.  *Note
     Syntax::.

Super
     Super is the name of a modifier bit which a keyboard input
     character may have.  To make a character Super, type it while
     holding down the <SUPER> key.  Such characters are given names
     that start with `Super-' (usually written `s-' for short).  *Note
     Super: User Input.

Suspending
     Suspending Emacs means stopping it temporarily and returning
     control to its parent process, which is usually a shell.  Unlike
     killing a job (q.v.), you can later resume the suspended Emacs job
     without losing your buffers, unsaved edits, undo history, etc.
     *Note Exiting::.

Tags Table
     A tags table is a file that serves as an index to the function
     definitions in one or more other files.  *Note Tags::.

Termscript File
     A termscript file contains a record of all characters sent by
     Emacs to the terminal.  It is used for tracking down bugs in Emacs
     redisplay.  Emacs does not make a termscript file unless you tell
     it to.  *Note Bugs::.

Text
     `Text' has two meanings (*note Text::):

        * Data consisting of a sequence of characters, as opposed to
          binary numbers, executable programs, and the like.  The basic
          contents of an Emacs buffer (aside from the text properties,
          q.v.) are always text in this sense.

        * Data consisting of written human language, as opposed to
          programs, or following the stylistic conventions of human
          language.

Text-only Terminal
     A text-only terminal is a display that is limited to displaying
     text in character units.  Such a terminal cannot control
     individual pixels it displays.  Emacs supports a subset of display
     features on text-only terminals.

Text Properties
     Text properties are annotations recorded for particular characters
     in the buffer.  Images in the buffer are recorded as text
     properties; they also specify formatting information.  *Note
     Editing Format Info::.

Tool Bar
     The tool bar is a line (sometimes multiple lines) of icons at the
     top of an Emacs frame.  Clicking on one of these icons executes a
     command.  You can think of this as a graphical relative of the
     menu bar (q.v.).  *Note Tool Bars::.

Tooltips
     Tooltips are small windows displaying a help echo (q.v.) text that
     explains parts of the display, lists useful options available via
     mouse clicks, etc.  *Note Tooltips::.

Top Level
     Top level is the normal state of Emacs, in which you are editing
     the text of the file you have visited.  You are at top level
     whenever you are not in a recursive editing level (q.v.) or the
     minibuffer (q.v.), and not in the middle of a command.  You can
     get back to top level by aborting (q.v.) and quitting (q.v.).
     *Note Quitting::.

Transposition
     Transposing two units of text means putting each one into the place
     formerly occupied by the other.  There are Emacs commands to
     transpose two adjacent characters, words, balanced expressions
     (q.v.) or lines (*note Transpose::).

Truncation
     Truncating text lines in the display means leaving out any text on
     a line that does not fit within the right margin of the window
     displaying it.  See also `continuation line.'  *Note Truncation:
     Basic.

TTY
     See `text-only terminal.'

Undoing
     Undoing means making your previous editing go in reverse, bringing
     back the text that existed earlier in the editing session.  *Note
     Undo::.

User Option
     A user option is a variable (q.v.) that exists so that you can
     customize Emacs by setting it to a new value.  *Note Variables::.

Variable
     A variable is an object in Lisp that can store an arbitrary value.
     Emacs uses some variables for internal purposes, and has others
     (known as `user options' (q.v.)) just so that you can set their
     values to control the behavior of Emacs.  The variables used in
     Emacs that you are likely to be interested in are listed in the
     Variables Index in this manual (*note Variable Index::).  *Note
     Variables::, for information on variables.

Version Control
     Version control systems keep track of multiple versions of a
     source file.  They provide a more powerful alternative to keeping
     backup files (q.v.).  *Note Version Control::.

Visiting
     Visiting a file means loading its contents into a buffer (q.v.)
     where they can be edited.  *Note Visiting::.

Whitespace
     Whitespace is any run of consecutive formatting characters (space,
     tab, newline, and backspace).

Widening
     Widening is removing any restriction (q.v.) on the current buffer;
     it is the opposite of narrowing (q.v.).  *Note Narrowing::.

Window
     Emacs divides a frame (q.v.) into one or more windows, each of
     which can display the contents of one buffer (q.v.) at any time.
     *Note Screen::, for basic information on how Emacs uses the screen.
     *Note Windows::, for commands to control the use of windows.  Some
     other editors use the term "window" for what we call a `frame'
     (q.v.) in Emacs.

Word Abbrev
     See `abbrev.'

Word Search
     Word search is searching for a sequence of words, considering the
     punctuation between them as insignificant.  *Note Word Search::.

WYSIWYG
     WYSIWYG stands for "What you see is what you get."  Emacs generally
     provides WYSIWYG editing for files of characters; in Enriched mode
     (*note Formatted Text::), it provides WYSIWYG editing for files
     that include text formatting information.

Yanking
     Yanking means reinserting text previously killed.  It can be used
     to undo a mistaken kill, or for copying or moving text.  Some other
     systems call this "pasting."  *Note Yanking::.

