/* $Xorg: README,v 1.3 2000/08/17 19:42:14 cpqbld Exp $ */

		PEX-SI Architectural Specification

This document describes the architecture of PEX-SI.  It includes
descriptions of the components and features of the PEX-SI design.

This document has changed substantially for Beta release.  Specifically,
the Server design has been documented in a more high level and terse manner.
Much of the detail that was previously in the Architecture Specification 
has been moved to the Porting Guide.

This directory contains the postscript files you need to print the Architecture
Specification.  
	cover.ps -- The cover sheet
	contents.ps -- The table of contents
	tables.ps -- The list of tables
	figures.ps -- The list of figures
	doc.ps -- The chapter and appendix body pages.
	index.ps -- The index

On most systems you can use lpr to print the files.  You should print in the 
order listed above so you do not have to collate.  The document is designed 
to be double sided, and each part of the document (i.e. table of contents, 
tables and figures listings, chapters and index) begins on an odd page number.  
You may have to supply some blank pages before copying.

This directory also contains the document troff source files. The document 
consists of 4 files:

	cover.irm -- The cover sheet
	intro.irm -- The introductory chapter
	api.irm -- The chapter describing the API or client-side implementation
	server.irm -- The chapter describing the server-side implementation

In addition, this directory contains this README and a Makefile.  The targets
included in the Makefile are:

	all --	Troffs all document files into dit files.  (dit means 
		`device independent troff') It also creates an index, table 
		of contents, and table and figure listings.  The resultant 
		files are cover.dit, contents.dit (table of contents), 
		tables.dit, figures.dit, doc.dit (all chapters), and index.dit. 

		Note: You will have to provide your own mechanism of converting
		the files to postscript files if you are going to use the Makefile. 

	clean -- If you modify the text in anyway and want to `re-make' the
		document, you should first do a ``make clean'' before doing a 
		``make all''.  This target will remove all dit files, the 
		slush.file and the outline file created in in the previous make.
