INSTALLATION

NOTE! The default configuration file has moved from
/usr/lib/man.config or /etc/man.conf to /usr/share/misc/man.conf.
Remove the former two.
The country code dk has been replaced by the language code da.
If you had Danish man pages installed, these should probably be moved.

The quick installation goes in three steps:
	1. configure -default
	2. make
	3. make install

This should suffice for most people. The defaults are:
   Only English man pages, no message catalogs, man not suid,
   handle compressed man pages, compress cat pages, create cat pages
   whenever the appropriate directory exists,
   follow FHS by putting cat pages under /var/cache/man provided that
   that directory exists.

In order to select man pages in other languages, replace Step 1 by
	1. configure +lang de,en,nl
or perhaps (especially when making a general distribution) by
	1. configure +lang all
This yields all the defaults, except for the language setting.

People who want something other than the default also use three steps:
1. configure -ask
2. make
3. make install
but have to answer a lot of questions during configure.

In somewhat greater detail:

1. Run configure.  This will grope around your system a bit and then
   ask you a number of questions.  It will create a Makefile from the
   file Makefile.in.  You may have to do some fine tuning to get things
   to work exactly right on your system.  If you do, I'd like to know
   what changes you had to make to get things working.

   Man uses groff (nroff, troff) to format man pages. If you don't
   have *roff, then you can only use preformatted man pages.

   You can make man suid to some uid, say man, where man is the owner
   of the directories (like /usr/man/cat*) for formatted man pages.
   That way man can write formatted pages there, even when the directory
   does not have universal write permission. However, it is fairly easy
   to spoof man, so really this setup is not very different from the one
   where /usr/man/cat* has universal write permission.
   Never make man suid bin or daemon or root!

   Of course it is not necessary at all to cache formatted man pages.
   Formatting usually takes less than a second, and by not having
   preformatted pages one avoids problems with window width, integrity, etc.

2. Look at the man.conf file. This determines the programs and extensions
   used in compressing and uncompressing cat pages. It also determines
   the system-wide mappings from bin directories to man page directories.
   It was constructed by configure; you might want to make some changes.

3. Do a `make all', try it out, and then if you're happy with that, do
   a `make install'.  You don't need to be root to use this set of
   programs.
   [Note: if you want to try man with the new, not yet installed, man.conf
   file, use "man -C ./man.conf ...".]

4. Install the whatis database(s) by running makewhatis.  If you want
   to keep things absolutely current, you'll need to run this whenever
   you add new man pages.  You might want to add an entry in your
   crontab. 
