
RELATED CHANGES TO OTHER PARTS OF THE X SOURCE TREE:
----------------------------------------------------------------------

 A) Add ability to dynamically add and remove video modes and to switch
    directly to a specific mode to the XFree86-VidModeExtension

 B) Update vidmode extension to know about the Hskew parameter

 C) Add a GetViewPort function to the vidmode extension

 D) Update os-support/README.OS-lib with info regarding allowMouseOpenFail

 E) Modify the server mouse open functions to test that the file is of
    the correct type before opening the device ???

 F) In cards.c, allow $XWINHOME to override location of Cards file

 G) Write a README file which describes all the available options

 H) Add an option to SuperProbe to specify a parser-friendly output mode

 I) Add an option to SuperProbe to cause it to probe just enough to figure
    out which server should be run


CHANGES IN XF86SETUP:
----------------------------------------------------------------------

 1) When using the SVGA server, further restrict the list of available
    RAMDACs, clock chips, and READMEs once the chipset has been selected.

 2) Improve keybindings for the arrow keys (e.g. scale widgets should
    allow perpendicular movement to other widgets)

 3) Add configuration of related things that can be set with xset such as
    keyboard repeat rate, mouse acceleration, screen saver settings,
    etc. ???

 4) Check for proper permissions of various files ???

 6) More fine-grained control of what is read from the existing XF86Config ???

 7) Add support for XInput

 8) Add support for Modules

 9) Add ability to select modes and their order (dependant on vidmode
    extension changes)

10) Internationalization of messages

11) List all of the files that are found to be missing (not just the first)

12) Make the X symlink while in graphics mode, instead of after switching
    back to text mode

13) Investigate reports of the hsync and vsync fields not allowing editing

14) Update the xkbview widget to display glyphs on the keys (work is going
    to start soon on adding the necessary functionality to libxkbui)

15) The UI for the video RAM and RAMDAC max speed could probably improved
    a bit still

16) Preserve existing mode lines when reading existing config file

17) Preserve existing comments in the config file (difficult)

18) Make the list of available mouse devices show only the device names
    that are appropriate for the selected protocol

19) Add ability to map individual keys

20) Move the server flags configuration to the second server?

21) Check for invalid combinations of XKB settings

22) Add a warning that the XF86Config file is used just to set defaults
    (i.e. that comments and such will be lost)

23) Some kind of better monitor identifier

24) Display a warning message telling the user to use ctrl-alt-bkspc, if
    things lock up

25) Detect premature server shutdowns (e.g. if user presses ctrl-alt-bkspc)
    and then do what?

26) Move "Done" button to top row ???

27) Add user-friendly names for the possible mouse devices

28) Set a specific width for the "Sample Rate" / "Lines/Inch" slider to avoid
    the repacking of the widgets that currently occurs when changing to/from
    the MMHitTab protocol

29) Add a text area in which the keyboard can be tested

30) If server fails to start because of an already running server, increment
    and try again

31) If server startup fails for some other reason, include the error in the
    message to the user

32) Set the initial Emulate3Buttons state to on, if not reading from an
    existing config file

34) Provide a way to go back from phase 4 to phase 2.

35) Let the the user specify the existing config file to be read

36) Show the horizontal sync rates in the list of monitors

39) Limit card list to only those appropriate to what SuperProbe reports

41) Add button for displaying the option description README or perhaps
    add some kind of online help that describes a selected option (maybe
    something like balloon help)

44) Make the keyboard configuration screen also a seperate client
    (a la xmseconfig).

45) Do the same with the new mode selection screen

