Perltidy open BUGS and LIMITATIONS
    You can help perltidy evolve into a better program. If you think you
    have hit a bug or weird behavior, or have a suggested improvement,
    please send a note to perltidy at users.sourceforge.net.

    This file only lists open bugs. For bugs which have been fixed, see the
    ChangeLog.

  The --extrude and --mangle options can produce code with syntax errors
    The --extrude tries to put as many newlines in the formatted code as
    possible. The --mangle tries to remove as many newlines as possible.
    These options are very useful for stress testing perltidy (and Perl) but
    not so much for normal formatting. Occasionally they will produce code
    which Perl considers to have a syntax error. These problems often
    involve code where Perl is having to guess the tokenization based on
    whitespace. The given/when and switch/case statements are also
    particularly vulnerable to unusual line breaks and whitespace. This type
    of error should not normally occur in practice, but if it does it should
    be easy to fix the problem by rerunning perltidy with more normal
    parameters or by manually changing whitespace or newlines.

  The Pod:Html module has some bugs
    For the most part Pod::Html works very well and is very convenient
    because it part of the standard Perl distribution. But for example the
    following line

      =item B<< <Deck> = Session->new_cflt_deck; >>

    which uses double brackets to contain single brackets does not render
    correctly.

  Perltidy does not handle UTF-8 encoded files
  Two iterations are sometimes needed
    Usually the code produced by perltidy on the first pass does not change
    if it is run again, but sometimes a second pass will produce some small
    additional change. This mainly happens if a major style change is made,
    particularly when perltidy is untangling complex ternary statements. Use
    the iteration parameter -it=2 if it is important that the results be
    unchanged on subsequent passes, but note that this doubles the run time.

  Latest Bug and Wishlist at CPAN:
    For the latest list of bugs and feature requests at CPAN see:

    https://rt.cpan.org/Public/Dist/Display.html?Name=Perl-Tidy

