This is a Demo of a Flash 6 client using SOAP to communicate using JBoss.

Currently you must have the Flash modified jboss-net.sar deployed instead of
the standard configuration.  This means comment/uncomment out the servlet
specified in install-axis.xml, and rebuild jboss.net.  You must also build the
Hello World sample separately using the build.sh or build.bat in this
directory.

Copy both the ./jboss.net/output/lib/jboss-net.sar and the
./jboss.net/samples/Hello/output/lib/hello.ear to the
./jboss/server/default/deploy directory.

This sample requires the Flash 6 player, which if you don't have installed,
the sample will prompt you to install.  The sample is invoked via the URL:
http://localhost:8080/hello or whatever your host and port number are.

The application is made up of a .war, a simple EJB .jar, a .wsr, all bundled
into an .ear.  The .war contains the required Flash files.  You will need
Macromedia Flash MX in order to view the HelloWorldForm.fla file.  Several
Actionscript files are included in the Flash layers.  SOAP.as includes
SoapTarget.as, SoapOperation.as, and SoapParms.as.  lf-shadow.as contains
a utility function to give buttons and scroll bars a more 3D look and feel.
All of these Actionscript files should be considered library functions in
respect to the LGPL, and thus do not require you to release your source code,
only improvements and corrections to the library routines.

This sample project also utilizes a single build.xml that generates all the
required deployment descriptors, Java interface source files, compiles, and
builds all the required archives.  The jboss.net project builds a required
jboss-net-taglib.jar which is bundled into the hello.war.

Special Humour Note:
--------------------
The Hello animation in the upper right corner is actually an intended cognitive
joke.  Try it someone.  Pretend you are yelling out across the Grand Canyon
and the words are echoing back at you.  Say "HELLO!...ECHO... echo... Echo...".
Most people won't get it.

"Frederick N. Brier" <fbrier@multideck.com>
July 10, 2002