disable [ -afmprs ] name ...
       Temporarily disable the named hash table elements  or  patterns.
       The  default is to disable builtin commands.  This allows you to
       use an external command with the same name as a builtin command.
       The  -a  option  causes  disable  to  act  on  regular or global
       aliases.  The -s option causes disable to act on suffix aliases.
       The  -f option causes disable to act on shell functions.  The -r
       options causes disable to act on reserved words.  Without  argu-
       ments  all  disabled  hash table elements from the corresponding
       hash table are printed.  With the  -m  flag  the  arguments  are
       taken  as  patterns (which should be quoted to prevent them from
       undergoing filename expansion), and all hash table elements from
       the  corresponding  hash  table matching these patterns are dis-
       abled.  Disabled objects can be enabled with the enable command.

       With the option -p, name ... refer to elements  of  the  shell's
       pattern  syntax  as  described  in the section `Filename Genera-
       tion'.  Certain elements can be disabled  separately,  as  given
       below.

       Note  that  patterns not allowed by the current settings for the
       options EXTENDED GLOB, KSH GLOB and SH GLOB are  never  enabled,
                       -         -           -
       regardless  of  the setting here.  For example, if EXTENDED GLOB
                                                                  -
       is not active, the pattern ^ is ineffective even if `disable  -p
       "^"'  has  not been issued.  The list below indicates any option
       settings that restrict the use of the  pattern.   It  should  be
       noted  that  setting SH GLOB has a wider effect then merely dis-
                              -
       abling patterns as  certain  expressions,  in  particular  those
       involving parentheses, are parsed differently.

       The  following  patterns  may  be disabled; all the strings need
       quoting on the command line to prevent them  from  being  inter-
       preted  immediately as patterns and the patterns are shown below
       in single quotes as a reminder.
       '?'    The pattern character ?  wherever  it  occurs,  including
              when preceding a parenthesis with KSH GLOB.
                                                   -

       '*'    The  pattern  character  *  wherever it occurs, including
              recursive globbing and when preceding a parenthesis  with
              KSH GLOB.
                 -

       '['    Character classes.

       '<' (NO SH GLOB)
              -  -
              Numeric ranges.

       '|' (NO SH GLOB)
              -  -
              Alternation  in  grouped  patterns,  case  statements, or
              KSH GLOB parenthesised expressions.
                 -

       '(' (NO SH GLOB)
              -  -
              Grouping using single parentheses.  Disabling  this  does
              not  disable  the  use  of parentheses for KSH GLOB where
                                                            -
              they are introduced by a special character, nor for  glob
              qualifiers  (use  `setopt  NO BARE GLOB QUAL'  to disable
                                           -    -    -
              glob qualifiers that use parentheses only).

       '~' (EXTENDED GLOB)
                    -
              Exclusion in the form A~B.

       '^' (EXTENDED GLOB)
                    -
              Exclusion in the form A^B.

       '#' (EXTENDED GLOB)
                    -
              The pattern character # wherever it occurs, both for rep-
              etition of a previous pattern and for indicating globbing
              flags.

       '?(' (KSH GLOB)
                -
              The grouping form ?(...).  Note this is also disabled  if
              '?' is disabled.

       '*(' (KSH GLOB)
                -
              The  grouping form *(...).  Note this is also disabled if
              '*' is disabled.

       '+(' (KSH GLOB)
                -
              The grouping form +(...).

       '!(' (KSH GLOB)
                -
              The grouping form !(...).

       '@(' (KSH GLOB)
                -
              The grouping form @(...).
